Welcome to the review session for
week two of Operations Analytics Scores.
This review session is
completely optional.
If you feel confident in your knowledge
of the optimization tool kit,
take a look at the practice
problems we've prepared for you.
And if you feel ready to take
on week two homework questions.
On the other hand, if you feel you can
benefit from looking at additional
examples of resourceful location, and
network optimization models before
moving to the practice problems.
This session is for you.
In this review,
we will go over two additional
examples of optimization problems.
A resource allocation,
and a network management.
Here's the context for
the resource allocation example.
A UN agency is planning to
build housing units for
victims of a recent natural disaster.
Four types of housing units
are considered, A, B, C, and D.
Each type of housing unit
requires four basic resources,
bricks, iron sheets,
wooden poles, and labor hours.
For example, each unit of type B
requires 600 bricks, 10 iron sheets,
32 wooden poles, and 200 labor hours.
Different types of housing units provide
shelter for different numbers of people.
For example,
each type of B unit will house six people.
Its resource has limited availability.
For example, there's only 1.5 million
bricks available for this project.
The agency is trying to decide how many
units of each type to build, to house as
many people as possible without
exceeding the resource availabilities.
So we have a verbal
description of the problem.
The next step is to convert this verbal
description into algebraic formulas.
We must identify decision variables and
write formulas for
the objective function and
for the constraints.
Let's start with the decision variables.
We need to decide how many
units of each type to build.
So, we let NA designate the number
of units of type A to build,
and the number of units of
type B to build, and C and D,
the number of units of types C and
D to build respectively.
We have four decision variables.
Okay, the agency would like to
maximize the total number of people
receiving shelter.
If it builds NA type A units
the total number of people sheltered
in those units will be seven times NA.
In the same way if it builds NB,
NC, and ND units.
The contributions of those decisions
to the objective function will be
6xND+5xNC+7xND, and in this
contribution were all unit types, we get
the expression for the objective function.
Let's move to the constraints.
First, resource availabilities.
The number of required bricks cannot
exceed the availability of bricks.
If we build N-A of type A units,
they will require 400 times N-A Bricks,
if we build N-B of type B units,
we will require 600 times N-B bricks.
And so on, 400 NC and
300 time ND breaks for
NC type C units and ND of type D units.
The total number of
required breaks will be
400xNA+600xNB+400xNC+300xND.
And that should not exceed 1.5 million
bricks that the agency has available.
What about iron sheets?
The constraint on iron
sheets looks the same way.
The number of required
iron sheets cannot exceed
the number of iron sheets available.
So we add all the requirements for
iron sheets across four unit types.
20xNa+10xNb+25xNc=18xNd, and
that should not exceed 100,000 iron
sheets that the agency has available.
In a similar way the number
of required wooden poles
cannot exceed the wooden
pole availability.
The number of required
poles will be 35*Na + 32*Nb
+ 26*Nc + 30*Nd.
And that total sum cannot exceed 125,000
wooden poles that
the agency has available.
Finally, a similar requirement must be
satisfied for the number of labor hours.
The total number of labor hours
available is 1.5 million, and
that could not be exceeded by the total
requirement for the number of labor hours,
300 times na plus 200
times nb + 200*Nc +400*Nd.
So, let's put together all
the resource availability constraints.
We have four of them.
One for bricks, one for iron sheets,
one for wooden poles, and
one for labour hours.
Finally, we need to ensure that the
numbers of housing units are integer and
non-negative.
So this is our complete model.
We need to identify the numbers of
each type of housing unit to build
to maximize the total
number of sheltered people,
subject to limitations on
our resource availabilities.
Here's the template Housing Relief_0.
We have posted it for you.
You might find it useful to open and
follow my steps.
So we have the problem data here.
In order to complete our model we
need to define decision variables.
Objective function and constraints.
First, decision variables.
In this problem, we need to determine the
number of houses of each of four types, A,
B, C & D, to build.
So, we need four decision variables.
An A, and B and C and D.
We will use the cells C5 through F5,
for those four variables.
Let's put some trial values in the cell,
say 1,000 into each.
Now let's use our convention to
distinguish these cells from the rest by
making them bold and blue.
Next, the objective function.
In this problem,
the UN agency is trying to maximize
the total number of sheltered people.
So, H5 will be used to store
the value of this objective.
The formula is sum product
A five decision variables, C5:F5.
And of the cells C6:F6.
Because those cells reflect the numbers
of people sheltered in each type of
housing unit.
So that's the formula.
As we can see the objective
function value for
the current set of these certain
variables, is equal to 25,000.
Again following our convention
let's change the font
in the objective function cell to bold and
red.
Finally, we need to specify
the constraints for our problem.
In trying to maximize its objective,
the agency is restricted by the amounts of
four resources, bricks, wooden poles,
iron sheets, and labor hours.
So for any set of number of housing
units the agency plans to build,
it must calculate the corresponding
resource requirements and
ensure those requirements do not exceed
the availabilities of these resources.
Let's first write down the formula that
calculates the required number of bricks
associated with the set of decision
variables in the cell C5 through F5.
We will put this formula
into the cell G10.
So in order to calculate
the required number of bricks,
we write down the formulas SUMPRODUCT
of our decision variables,
C5, F5, and
the respective brick requirements for
each type of housing unit,
which are located in the cells C10, F10.
The resulting requirement is 1.7 million
bricks, this is more than the amount of
bricks the agency has, but we will
let the solver sort this out later.
Now in order to calculate
the required amounts for
the remaining resources
we can go to cell G10,
use the absolute cell references for
the decision variable cells.
And then copy and paste this formula
into the cells G11 through G13.
Just to make sure that we have
copied everything correctly,
let's go to the cell G13 and
have a look at the formula.
We're using the shortcut
F2 to display the formula.
Okay, it looks correct.
Okay, now we're ready to call the solver.
Data > Solver.
Now we need to specify three components
of our decision model to the solver.
Objective function,
decision variables and constraints.
For the objective function,
we'd point to the cell H5.
And we want to maximize this objective,
that's the total number
of people sheltered.
Decision variables are the number
of units of each type to build,
so that's C5 through F5, and constraints.
Well, the main constraints here
are the availability of our resources,
so we point out the cells G10 through
G13 as our resource requirements.
And those should not exceed
our resource availabilities,
which are stored in I10 through I13.
We also need to tell the solver that our
decision variable is the number of housing
units must be integer, so we'll click Add.
We select our decision variables,
and we select int,
integer as an option here, we click OK and
we see that our constraint is added here.
We wanna make sure that the number of
housing units we build is non-negative.
We leave the solving method as it is,
GRG nonlinear.
And in the options, we uncheck Ignore
Integer Constraints to make sure that
our requirements for the number of housing
units to be integer is not ignored.
We click OK, we click Solve and we see
the solution displayed on the spreadsheet.
Here's a picture of the optimized
spreadsheet with the formulas put in.
As you can see, the optimal portfolio of
housing units is dominated by the units of
type D and type B with only two units
of type C recommended to be built.
Units of type A housed seven people each,
just like the units of type D, but
they apparently take too
much resources to build and
are not included in the optimal solution.
In the second example
in this review session,
we're looking at the network
optimization problem.
In particular,
we're considering a company,
Columbia Parquet,
that makes hardwood floors.
The company operates two plants
in different parts of Germany,
plant A and plant B.
During the next quarter,
each plant can produce only up to
a certain amount of hardwood floors.
For example,
plant A has a quarterly production
capacity of 2,500 of thousand
square feet of hardwood floors.
Company's hardwood floors
are sold in three regions.
Each region has a minimum required
amount of hardwood floors
it must receive in next quarter.
Colombi may decide to ship more than
those minimum values to each region, but
it cannot ship less.
When shipping floors between plants and
marketing regions,
the company incurs the following costs.
For example, if it ships 1,000 square
feet from Plant B to region 2,
it will incur costs of 25.5 Euros.
So Colombi needs to understand how
much it should ship from each plant,
to each marketing region, to achieve
the lowest possible shipping cost,
while ensuring that all demands are
satisfied by the available plant capacity.
In order to convert this verbal
description of the problem
into an algebraic one,
we must specify decision variables,
objective function and constraints.
So let's start with
the decision variables.
First, two variables that count
amount ship to region 1 from plant
A and from plant B.
Now let's add amounts shipped
to region 2 from plant A and
from plant B and,
the amounts shipped to region 3.
All and all, we have six decision
variables in this network.
The objective in this problem
is the total shipping cost,
and it has six components,
one for each decision variable.
On the constraints side,
we have two constrained types.
The first one is the supply constraints.
Plant A cannot produce and
ship more than its capacity.
So all shipments that originate from
plant A cannot add up to more than 2,500.
In a similar fashion, the total shipments
from plant B cannot exceed 3,000.
Demand constraints is
the second constrained type.
For region 1 the total shipment
must be at least the minimum demand
requirement of 2000.
Region 2 must receive at least 930.
For region 3 the minimum
requirement is 2,200.
Finally, we cannot ship negative amounts.
Since it is possible to ship fractions of
thousands of square feet
of hardwood floors,
we do not impose a requirement that our
decision variables must be an integer.
Here's the complete algebraic
formulation for the Colombi's Problem.
We can now use the Excel template
Colombi_0 we have prepared,
to set up the spreadsheet model and
optimize it using solver.
As usual we start with the zero
version of the Excel file, Colombi_0.
The first task is to define decision
variable cells on the spreadsheet.
The decision variables in this problem are
the quantities expressed in thousand of
square feet to be shipped from each
plant to each marketing region.
We will put the values of those decision
variables in the cells B11 through D12.
So for example, the cell B11 will hold
the value for the number of 1,000
of square feet of hardwood floors to
be shipped from Plant A to Region 1.
Let us put in some trial values
into the decision variable cells.
Say, 1,000 for each cell.
As before, we use blue color and
bold font to distinguish the decision
variable cells from other cells.
Now the objective function.
In the Columbi example, the objective
function is the total shipping cost.
This is the objective function
the company would like to minimize.
We'll place the formula for
this objective function into the cell F3.
We start with the equality sign and put in
SUMPRODUCT of our decision variable cells,
B11, D12, and
the corresponding transportation costs,
B6 through D7.
The result in the cell F3 is,
according to Excel, 124,000 euros.
So we have the objective function cell.
Let's change the font in this cell to
bold and red, for it to stand out.
Now it's constraint's turn.
In the Columbia example, we have two plan
capacity constraints and thee market and
region demand constraints.
On the capacity side,
the total amount shipped from each plant
cannot exceed that plant's
manufacturing capacity.
In a cell e11, let's calculate
the total amount shipped from plant A.
So we write, SUM of B11,
C11, and D11.
And we get the result for the trial
values of decision variables, 3000.
This amount exceeds
the Plant A capacity so
the solar will have to adjust the values
of the decision variables to make sure
that we have a feasible shipping plan.
Now we can copy and
paste the formula in the cell
E11 into the cell E12 to calculate
the amount shipped from Plant B.
3,000.
Now let's move to the demand
constraints for each marketing region.
We will write the formula for
the total amount currently shipped
to Region 1 in the cell B13.
So the formula is *SUM(B11,B12).
In a similar way, we get the amounts
shipped to Regions 2 and 3, by copying and
pasting the formula from the cell
B13 into the cells C13 and D13.
Now, if we look into the cell D13,
We see that the formula there
is the sum of D11 and D12,
which is the sum of the quantity shipped
to Region 3 from Plants A and B.
We have specified the decision variables,
the object functions in the constraints.
And now we can use the solver
to find out optimal solution.
So we'll go to data, click on solver and
start with the objective function.
Objective function cell is F3 and
we're minimizing this objective because
this is the total shipping cost.
The decision variables
are the cells B11 through D12 and
there are two types of the constraints.
First type is to make sure that
the amount shipped from each plant,
does not exceed
the capacity of each plant.
Let's click OK.
The second type of constraint
is to make sure that
whatever each region receives,
B13 through D13
is at least what this region requested,
B15, D15.
Now we do not need the integer constraints
here because we can ship fractional
amounts, but we do need to specify that
our shipping quantities are now negative.
We leave this solving method as
GRG nonlinear, we click Solve, and
the optimal solution is
displayed on the spreadsheet.
Here's the optimised spreadsheet.